# 1961-72: Development of packet switching
Preceding the internet was the telephone, which enabled long distance communication using [[W2N1 - Network core#Circuit switching|circuit switching]]. With the advent of [[W1N2 - History of operating systems#Timesharing|timeshared computers]] in the 60s people started to consider how to connect computers together to share access to one machine between geographically distributed people. This activity was likely to be bursty, so circuit switching was [[W2N1 - Network core#Packet switching vs circuit switching|likely to be suboptimal]]. In 1969, ARPAnet was used to perform a remote login from UCLA to the Stanford Research Institute, which was the first remote login over a long distance network. By 1972, ARPAnet had grown to 15 nodes, the first host-to-host protocol was written, and with it the first e-mail program was created.
# 1972-80: Proprietary networks and internetworking
The initial ARPAnet was a single closed network, with each host being physically attached to an ARPAnet IMP. In the early to mid 70s, other stand-alone packet-switching networks came into being, such as ALOHAnet - a microwave network linking universities in Hawaii, and DARPA's packet-satellite and packet-radio networks, and many others. At this point DARPA, seeing the value in interconnecting these networks, started research into internetting, or joining networks. During this period TCP started being developed, and was split into IP, TCP, and UDP by the end of the 70s.
# 1980-90: Proliferation of networks
By the end of the 70s, hosts connected to ARPAnet numbered around 200. By the end of the 80s, the number of hosts connected to the public Internet would reach a hundred thousand.
A key driver of the extreme growth seen was several distinct efforts to connect universities together, such as BITNET in the US Northeast or NSFNET (which started the decade with a backbone speed of 56 kbps and reached 1.5 Mbps by the end of the decade) which was created to provide access to NSF-sponsored supercomputers.
In 1983, ARPAnet replaced NCP with TCP/IP.
In the early 1980s, the French government launched the Minitel project, which built out a packet-switched network and offered a free Minitel terminal to any household that wanted one.
# 1990-2000: The internet explosion
ARPAnet ceased to exist at the start of the 90s, then in 1991, NSFNET lifted its restrictions on commercial use of its network, and itself was decommissioned in 1995, with Internet backbone traffic being carried by commercial ISPs.
In 1991, the World Wide Web was invented at CERN by Tim Berners-Lee, and he and his associates developed initial versions of HTML, HTTP, a Web server and a browser, and by the end of 1993 there were around 200 web servers in operation. By 1995, Netscape browsers were becoming wide spread.
# 2000s onwards
Since the new millennium, the internet has developed at an incredibly rapid pace. Visible changes include the aggressive deployment of Internet access to homes - first broadband and now fibre to the home - which has led to an explosion in data intensive applications such as YouTube, Netflix, and video conferencing; ubiquitous high speed internet access via 4/5G connections allowing devices to connect to the internet no matter where they are; and online social networking. Less visibly but perhaps more significant, there have been extensive private networks deployed by online service providers such as Google and Microsoft, and the rise of cloud computing resulting in highly scalable computing and storage for companies which may not own a single server.